README.md, before:

* [documentation](https://docs.rs/rio)
* [chat](https://discord.gg/Z6VsXds)
* [sponsor](https://github.com/sponsors/spacejam)

# rio

misuse-resistant bindings for io_uring, the hottest
thing to happen to linux IO in a long time.

#### Innovations

* only relies on libc, no need for c/bindgen to complicate things, nobody wants that
* the completions work great with threads or an async runtime (`Completion` implements Future)
* takes advantage of Rust's lifetimes and RAII to guarantee
  that the kernel will never asynchronously write to memory
  that Rust has destroyed.
* uses Rust marker traits to guarantee that a buffer will never
  be written into unless it is writable memory. (prevents
  you from trying to write data into static read-only memory)
* no need to mess with `IoSlice` / `libc::iovec` directly.
  rio maintains these in the background for you.

This is intended to be the core of [sled's](http://sled.rs) writepath.
It is built with a specific high-level
application in mind: a high performance storage
engine and replication system.

#### What's io_uring?

io_uring is the biggest thing to happen to the
linux kernel in a very long time. It will change
everything. Anything that uses epoll right now
will be rewritten to use io_uring if it wants
to stay relevant. I built rio to gain an early
deep understanding of this amazing new interface,
so that I could use it ASAP  and responsibly with
[sled](http://sled.rs).

io_uring unlocks the following kernel features:

* real, fully-async disk IO without using O_DIRECT
  as you have to do with AIO
* batching hundreds of disk and network IO operations
  into a single syscall, which is especially wonderful
  in a post-meltdown/spectre world where our syscalls have
  [dramatically slowed down](http://www.brendangregg.com/blog/2018-02-09/kpti-kaiser-meltdown-performance.html)
* 0-syscall IO operation submission, if configured in
  SQPOLL mode
* 0-syscall IO operation completion polling, unless
  configured in IOPOLL mode.
* Allows expression of sophisticated 0-copy broadcast
  semantics, similar to splice(2) or sendfile(2) but
  working with many file-like objects without ever
  needing to bounce memory and mappings into userspace
  en-route.
* Allows IO buffers and file descriptors to be registered
  for cheap reuse (remapping buffers and file descriptors
  for use in the kernel has a significant cost).

To read more about io_uring, check out:

* [Efficient IO with io_uring](https://kernel.dk/io_uring.pdf)
* [Ringing in a new asynchronous I/O API](https://lwn.net/Articles/776703/)
* Follow [Jens Axboe on Twitter](https://twitter.com/axboe) to follow dev progress

#### why not use those other Rust io_uring libraries?

* they haven't copied `rio`'s features yet, which you pretty much
  have to use anyway to responsibly use `io_uring` due to the
  sharp edges of the API.

#### examples that will be broken in the next day or two

file reading:

```rust
let mut ring = rio::new().expect("create uring");
let file = std::fs::open("file").expect("openat");
let dater: &mut [u8] = &[0; 66];
let completion = ring.read(&file, &mut dater, at)?;

// if using threads
completion.wait()?;

// if using async
completion.await?
```

file writing:

```rust
let mut ring = rio::new().expect("create uring");
let file = std::fs::create("file").expect("openat");
let dater: &[u8] = &[6; 66];
let completion = ring.read_at(&file, &dater, at)?;

// if using threads
completion.wait()?;

// if using async
completion.await?
```

tcp echo server:

```rust
use std::{
    io::{self, prelude::*},
    net::{TcpListener, TcpStream},
};

fn proxy(a: &TcpStream, b: &TcpStream) -> io::Result<()> {
    let ring = rio::new()?;

    // for kernel 5.6 and later, io_uring will support
    // recv/send which will more gracefully handle
    // reads of larger sizes.
    let mut buf = vec![0_u8; 1];
    loop {
        let read = ring.read_at_ordered(
            a,
            &mut buf,
            0,
            rio::Ordering::Link,
        )?;
        let write = ring.write_at(b, &buf, 0)?;
        ring.submit_all()?;
        read.wait()?;
        write.wait()?;
    }
}

fn main() -> io::Result<()> {
    let acceptor = TcpListener::bind("127.0.0.1:6666")?;

    // kernel 5.5 and later support TCP accept
    for stream_res in acceptor.incoming() {
        let stream = stream_res?;
        proxy(&stream, &stream);
    }

    Ok(())
}
```

speedy O_DIRECT shi0t (try this at home / run the o_direct example)

```rust
use std::{
    fs::OpenOptions, io::Result,
    os::unix::fs::OpenOptionsExt,
};

const CHUNK_SIZE: u64 = 4096 * 256;

// `O_DIRECT` requires all reads and writes
// to be aligned to the block device's block
// size. 4096 might not be the best, or even
// a valid one, for yours!
#[repr(align(4096))]
struct Aligned([u8; CHUNK_SIZE as usize]);

fn main() -> Result<()> {
    // start the ring
    let ring = rio::new()?;

    // open output file, with `O_DIRECT` set
    let file = OpenOptions::new()
        .read(true)
        .write(true)
        .create(true)
        .truncate(true)
        .custom_flags(libc::O_DIRECT)
        .open("file")?;

    let out_buf = Aligned([42; CHUNK_SIZE as usize]);
    let out_slice: &[u8] = &out_buf.0;

    let in_buf = Aligned([42; CHUNK_SIZE as usize]);
    let in_slice: &[u8] = &in_buf.0;

    let mut completions = vec![];

    for i in 0..(10 * 1024) {
        let at = i * CHUNK_SIZE;

        // By setting the `Link` order,
        // we specify that the following
        // read should happen after this
        // write.
        let write = ring.write_at_ordered(
            &file,
            &out_slice,
            at,
            rio::Ordering::Link,
        )?;
        completions.push(write);

        let read = ring.read_at(&file, &in_slice, at)?;
        completions.push(read);
    }

    // Submissions will happen lazily when we fill up
    // the submission queue, but we should hit this
    // ourselves for now. In the future there might
    // be a thread that does this automatically
    // at some interval if there's work to submit.
    ring.submit_all()?;

    for completion in completions.into_iter() {
        completion.wait()?;
    }

    Ok(())
}
```

Commit message:

Add blurb about backpressure to guarantee no overflows

README.md, after:

* [documentation](https://docs.rs/rio)
* [chat](https://discord.gg/Z6VsXds)
* [sponsor](https://github.com/sponsors/spacejam)

# rio

misuse-resistant bindings for io_uring, the hottest
thing to happen to linux IO in a long time.

#### Innovations

* only relies on libc, no need for c/bindgen to complicate things, nobody wants that
* the completions work great with threads or an async runtime (`Completion` implements Future)
* takes advantage of Rust's lifetimes and RAII to guarantee
  that the kernel will never asynchronously write to memory
  that Rust has destroyed.
* uses Rust marker traits to guarantee that a buffer will never
  be written into unless it is writable memory. (prevents
  you from trying to write data into static read-only memory)
* no need to mess with `IoSlice` / `libc::iovec` directly.
  rio maintains these in the background for you.

This is intended to be the core of [sled's](http://sled.rs) writepath.
It is built with a specific high-level
application in mind: a high performance storage
engine and replication system.

#### What's io_uring?

io_uring is the biggest thing to happen to the
linux kernel in a very long time. It will change
everything. Anything that uses epoll right now
will be rewritten to use io_uring if it wants
to stay relevant. I built rio to gain an early
deep understanding of this amazing new interface,
so that I could use it ASAP  and responsibly with
[sled](http://sled.rs).

io_uring unlocks the following kernel features:

* real, fully-async disk IO without using O_DIRECT
  as you have to do with AIO
* batching hundreds of disk and network IO operations
  into a single syscall, which is especially wonderful
  in a post-meltdown/spectre world where our syscalls have
  [dramatically slowed down](http://www.brendangregg.com/blog/2018-02-09/kpti-kaiser-meltdown-performance.html)
* 0-syscall IO operation submission, if configured in
  SQPOLL mode
* 0-syscall IO operation completion polling, unless
  configured in IOPOLL mode.
* Allows expression of sophisticated 0-copy broadcast
  semantics, similar to splice(2) or sendfile(2) but
  working with many file-like objects without ever
  needing to bounce memory and mappings into userspace
  en-route.
* Allows IO buffers and file descriptors to be registered
  for cheap reuse (remapping buffers and file descriptors
  for use in the kernel has a significant cost).
* If left to its own devices, io_uring will allow you to
  submit more IO operations than would actually fit in
  the completion queue, allowing completions to be dropped
  and causing leaks of any userspace thing waiting for
  the completion. rio exerts backpressure on submitters
  when the number of in-flight requests reaches this
  threshold, to guarantee that no completions will
  be dropped due to completion queue overflow.

To read more about io_uring, check out:

* [Efficient IO with io_uring](https://kernel.dk/io_uring.pdf)
* [Ringing in a new asynchronous I/O API](https://lwn.net/Articles/776703/)
* Follow [Jens Axboe on Twitter](https://twitter.com/axboe) to follow dev progress

#### why not use those other Rust io_uring libraries?

* they haven't copied `rio`'s features yet, which you pretty much
  have to use anyway to responsibly use `io_uring` due to the
  sharp edges of the API.

#### examples that will be broken in the next day or two

file reading:

```rust
let mut ring = rio::new().expect("create uring");
let file = std::fs::open("file").expect("openat");
let dater: &mut [u8] = &[0; 66];
let completion = ring.read(&file, &mut dater, at)?;

// if using threads
completion.wait()?;

// if using async
completion.await?
```

file writing:

```rust
let mut ring = rio::new().expect("create uring");
let file = std::fs::create("file").expect("openat");
let dater: &[u8] = &[6; 66];
let completion = ring.read_at(&file, &dater, at)?;

// if using threads
completion.wait()?;

// if using async
completion.await?
```

tcp echo server:

```rust
use std::{
    io::{self, prelude::*},
    net::{TcpListener, TcpStream},
};

fn proxy(a: &TcpStream, b: &TcpStream) -> io::Result<()> {
    let ring = rio::new()?;

    // for kernel 5.6 and later, io_uring will support
    // recv/send which will more gracefully handle
    // reads of larger sizes.
    let mut buf = vec![0_u8; 1];
    loop {
        let read = ring.read_at_ordered(
            a,
            &mut buf,
            0,
            rio::Ordering::Link,
        )?;
        let write = ring.write_at(b, &buf, 0)?;
        ring.submit_all()?;
        read.wait()?;
        write.wait()?;
    }
}

fn main() -> io::Result<()> {
    let acceptor = TcpListener::bind("127.0.0.1:6666")?;

    // kernel 5.5 and later support TCP accept
    for stream_res in acceptor.incoming() {
        let stream = stream_res?;
        proxy(&stream, &stream);
    }

    Ok(())
}
```

speedy O_DIRECT shi0t (try this at home / run the o_direct example)

```rust
use std::{
    fs::OpenOptions, io::Result,
    os::unix::fs::OpenOptionsExt,
};

const CHUNK_SIZE: u64 = 4096 * 256;

// `O_DIRECT` requires all reads and writes
// to be aligned to the block device's block
// size. 4096 might not be the best, or even
// a valid one, for yours!
#[repr(align(4096))]
struct Aligned([u8; CHUNK_SIZE as usize]);

fn main() -> Result<()> {
    // start the ring
    let ring = rio::new()?;

    // open output file, with `O_DIRECT` set
    let file = OpenOptions::new()
        .read(true)
        .write(true)
        .create(true)
        .truncate(true)
        .custom_flags(libc::O_DIRECT)
        .open("file")?;

    let out_buf = Aligned([42; CHUNK_SIZE as usize]);
    let out_slice: &[u8] = &out_buf.0;

    let in_buf = Aligned([42; CHUNK_SIZE as usize]);
    let in_slice: &[u8] = &in_buf.0;

    let mut completions = vec![];

    for i in 0..(10 * 1024) {
        let at = i * CHUNK_SIZE;

        // By setting the `Link` order,
        // we specify that the following
        // read should happen after this
        // write.
        let write = ring.write_at_ordered(
            &file,
            &out_slice,
            at,
            rio::Ordering::Link,
        )?;
        completions.push(write);

        let read = ring.read_at(&file, &in_slice, at)?;
        completions.push(read);
    }

    // Submissions will happen lazily when we fill up
    // the submission queue, but we should hit this
    // ourselves for now. In the future there might
    // be a thread that does this automatically
    // at some interval if there's work to submit.
    ring.submit_all()?;

    for completion in completions.into_iter() {
        completion.wait()?;
    }

    Ok(())
}
```
